pep-9999.rst, before:

PEP: 9999
Title: Details of generic support for TypedDict
Author: Samodya Abeysiriwardane <hi at sransara.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standard Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 19-Jul-2021
Python-Version: 3.11
Post-History: 


Abstract
========

PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_ introduces a type constructor ``TypedDict`` to support the
use case where a dictionary object has a specific set of string keys, each with
a value of a specific type. 
But it does not specify the details of supporting generic TypedDicts, where the
type of a value can be parameterized.
This PEP specifies the details of a type parameterized TypedDicts as an
extension of PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_.

Motivation
==========

TypedDict is a great choice to give a precise type for pure data containers.
Almost all container data types of the standard library support generics.
TypedDicts should also support generics.

Following is few example usecases for having generic TypedDicts.

Using type annotations to convey relationships between keys.

  class Page(TypedDict, Generic[T]):
      uid: Hash[T]
      desc: str
      item: T

An example where the function on container type does not concern with
the concrete type of the contents.

  def get_items(*pages: Page[T]) -> List[T]:
      return [page["item"] for page in pages]

Another usage example in annotating polymorphic JSON responses.

  class Item(TypedDict):
      type: str

  class ValueItem(Item):
      value: int

  T = TypeVar('T')

  class ItemPager(TypedDict, Generic[T]):
      next_page: Optional[str]
      items: List[T]

  def get_value_items() -> List[ValueItem]:
      value_items: List[ValueItem] = []
      url = "https://example.com/value_items"
      while url:
          response = requests.get(url)
          pager: ItemPager[ValueItem] = response.json()
          url = pager['next_page']
          value_items += pager['items']
      return value_items


Specification
=============

This PEP is an extension of PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_, hence details specified here for
TypedDicts will be in addition to what is specified in PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_.

Class based syntax
------------------

Class based syntax for TypedDicts will follow the same specification as
user defined generic types in PEP 484 [#PEP-484]_ and class based syntax
specification detailed in PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_.

   from typing import TypedDict

   T = TypeVar("T")

   class Pager(TypedDict, Generic[T]):
       next_page: str
       items: List[T]

``Generic[T]`` as a base class defines that the class ``Pager`` takes a
single type parameter ``T``. ``Pager[int]`` is a TypedDict that has a
key ``items`` with value type ``List[int]``.


Alternative syntax
------------------

The following alternative syntax is semantically equivalent to the
previous class based syntax example. Order of Generic subscript TypeVars
will be in the order of their appearance.

   from typing import TypedDict

   T = TypeVar("T")

   Pager = TypedDict("Pager", {
       'next_page': str,
       'items': List[T],
   })


Inheritance
-----------

A TypedDict can only inherit from another TypedDict or TypedDict with
Generic. This is in contrast to PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_, which specifies that a
TypedDict can only inherit from a TypedDict.

Subclassing a generic TypedDict without specifying type parameters
assumes ``Any`` for each position.

All other details of TypedDict inheritance from PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_ applies.


Using generic TypedDict types
-----------------------------

Here is an example of how the type ``Pager`` can be used.

   pager: Pager[str] = {
       'next_page': 'https://example.com/value_items?p=2',
       'items': ['item 1', 'item2',]
   }

If the type parameter is not specified, type checker can follow the same
behavior as how it treats other generic instances without a type
parameter.


Type consistency
----------------

Same type consistency rules from PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_ applies.

Since TypedDict objects are mutable, value types should behave
invariantly. Therefore at declaration a type checker should only accept
invariant TypeVars.

   from typing import TypedDict

   T = TypeVar("T", covariant=True)

   class Page(TypedDict, Generic[T]): # Covariant T should not be allowed
       item: T

   def set_item(p: Page[Animal]):
       p["item"] = Animal()

   page: Page[Dog] = Page(item=Dog())
   set_item(page)
   page["item"].bark() # Run time error


References
==========

.. [#PEP-589] PEP 589, TypedDict: Type Hints for Dictionaries with a Fixed Set of Keys, Lehtosalo
   (https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0589/)

.. [#PEP-484] PEP 484, Type Hints, Rossum, Lehtosalo, Langa
   (https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0484/)

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:

Commit message:

Add detail about ordered dict fields

pep-9999.rst, after:

PEP: 9999
Title: Details of generic support for TypedDict
Author: Samodya Abeysiriwardane <hi at sransara.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standard Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 19-Jul-2021
Python-Version: 3.11
Post-History: 


Abstract
========

PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_ introduces a type constructor ``TypedDict`` to support the
use case where a dictionary object has a specific set of string keys, each with
a value of a specific type. 
But it does not specify the details of supporting generic TypedDicts, where the
type of a value can be parameterized.
This PEP specifies the details of a type parameterized TypedDicts as an
extension of PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_.

Motivation
==========

TypedDict is a great choice to give a precise type for pure data containers.
Almost all container data types of the standard library support generics.
TypedDicts should also support generics.

Following is few example usecases for having generic TypedDicts.

Using type annotations to convey relationships between keys.

  class Page(TypedDict, Generic[T]):
      uid: Hash[T]
      desc: str
      item: T

An example where the function on container type does not concern with
the concrete type of the contents.

  def get_items(*pages: Page[T]) -> List[T]:
      return [page["item"] for page in pages]

Another usage example in annotating polymorphic JSON responses.

  class Item(TypedDict):
      type: str

  class ValueItem(Item):
      value: int

  T = TypeVar('T')

  class ItemPager(TypedDict, Generic[T]):
      next_page: Optional[str]
      items: List[T]

  def get_value_items() -> List[ValueItem]:
      value_items: List[ValueItem] = []
      url = "https://example.com/value_items"
      while url:
          response = requests.get(url)
          pager: ItemPager[ValueItem] = response.json()
          url = pager['next_page']
          value_items += pager['items']
      return value_items


Specification
=============

This PEP is an extension of PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_, hence details specified here for
TypedDicts will be in addition to what is specified in PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_.

Class based syntax
------------------

Class based syntax for TypedDicts will follow the same specification as
user defined generic types in PEP 484 [#PEP-484]_ and class based syntax
specification detailed in PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_.

   from typing import TypedDict

   T = TypeVar("T")

   class Pager(TypedDict, Generic[T]):
       next_page: str
       items: List[T]

``Generic[T]`` as a base class defines that the class ``Pager`` takes a
single type parameter ``T``. ``Pager[int]`` is a TypedDict that has a
key ``items`` with value type ``List[int]``.


Alternative syntax
------------------

The following alternative syntax is semantically equivalent to the
previous class based syntax example. Order of Generic subscript TypeVars
will be in the order of their appearance. For Python versions before 3.7
where dict item order is not guaranteed, an ordered dictionary needs to be
used with typevars.

   from typing import TypedDict

   T = TypeVar("T")

   Pager = TypedDict("Pager", {
       'next_page': str,
       'items': List[T],
   })


Inheritance
-----------

A TypedDict can only inherit from another TypedDict or TypedDict with
Generic. This is in contrast to PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_, which specifies that a
TypedDict can only inherit from a TypedDict.

Subclassing a generic TypedDict without specifying type parameters
assumes ``Any`` for each position.

All other details of TypedDict inheritance from PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_ applies.


Using generic TypedDict types
-----------------------------

Here is an example of how the type ``Pager`` can be used.

   pager: Pager[str] = {
       'next_page': 'https://example.com/value_items?p=2',
       'items': ['item 1', 'item2',]
   }

If the type parameter is not specified, type checker can follow the same
behavior as how it treats other generic instances without a type
parameter.


Type consistency
----------------

Same type consistency rules from PEP 589 [#PEP-589]_ applies.

Since TypedDict objects are mutable, value types should behave
invariantly. Therefore at declaration a type checker should only accept
invariant TypeVars.

   from typing import TypedDict

   T = TypeVar("T", covariant=True)

   class Page(TypedDict, Generic[T]): # Covariant T should not be allowed
       item: T

   def set_item(p: Page[Animal]):
       p["item"] = Animal()

   page: Page[Dog] = Page(item=Dog())
   set_item(page)
   page["item"].bark() # Run time error


References
==========

.. [#PEP-589] PEP 589, TypedDict: Type Hints for Dictionaries with a Fixed Set of Keys, Lehtosalo
   (https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0589/)

.. [#PEP-484] PEP 484, Type Hints, Rossum, Lehtosalo, Langa
   (https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0484/)

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
